---
layout: post
title:  "Knowledge management for infrastructure teams"
comments: true
excerpt_separator: <!--more-->
---

I have been working with security and infrastructure team for over a decade and
I know that using agile techniques with these teams are far from trivial. There
are some barriers that muddle the use of such techniques in those teams. In this
post I would like to share some thoughts about those barriers and discuss how
could we bypass them.

The first dificult I found deploying kanban in Infrastructure and Security is
the lack of literature that talk and explain about the subject regarding
those teams. The majority of the books and blog posts keep using development as
example. However there are some key diffences between developers and
infrastructure teams. 

The developers work many times are more interchangable. It means that developer
team may be working on different features, but the developers are generally
sharing at least the development stack, frameworks and programming language. Of
course there are a lot of complex activities that can be impossible to onboard
to unexperienced developers, but by the end of the day, it will be all about
complexity and business logic. It is rare to find a developer team that manage
several different technologies to develop a system. 

In infrastructure it is quite different. Instead of managing to use a common
language or framework, infrastructure teams tend to manage different products
that could be completely different on to the other. I'm not yelling that
infrastructure work is more complex, but just that the nature of the work
demands to be much more heterogenous than developers team. 

For instance, I'm currently leading the SAP infrastructure team. They are four
awesome guys that need to handle about one hundred server online with the most
different technologies. From the Netweaver application server to the Oracle
database. There are also other hibrid tools, such as IDM and TDMS. The point is
that those tools works completely different, which make 


using agile 

I have been working on security, infrastructure, DevOps teams for a long to know
that some unplanned tasks may easily break a well-crafted board. Hence, I would
like to share some insights about how to create a kanban board.

Most of the literature I have read describes boards geared towards development
teams. These boards generally comprise columns related to code, test and deploy
activites. Sometimes, these boards also include a colum related to planning
activities, where the team intends to break large generic histories (i.e.,
epics) into smaller detailed histories.

While these boards can work pretty well for developer teams, they generally do
not fit at all for security, infrastructure, and devops teams, because tha type
of work is very different. First, developer teams tend to focus on delivery
features of product. 





